[Music]
what's an algorithm in computer science
an algorithm was a set of instructions
for solving some problem step by step
typically algorithms are executed by
computers but we humans have algorithms
as well for instance how would you go
about counting the number of people in a
room well if you're like me you'd
probably point at each person one at a
time and count up from zero one two
three four and so forth well that's an
algorithm in fact let's try to express
it a bit more formally in pseudocode
English like syntax that resembles a
programming language let n equal zero
for each person in room set n equal to n
plus 1 how to interpret the pseudocode
quelt line 1 declares so to speak a
variable called n and initializes its
value to 0 this just means that at the
beginning of our algorithm the thing
with which we're counting has a value of
0 after all before we start counting we
haven't counted anything yet calling
this variable n is just a convention I
could have called it most anything now
line to des marks the start of a loop a
sequence of steps that will repeat some
number of times so in our example the
step we're taking is counting people in
the room beneath line 2 is line 3 which
describes exactly how we'll go about
counting the indentation implies that
it's line 3 that will repeat so what the
pseudocode is saying is that after
starting at 0 for each person in the
room we'll increase n by 1 now is this
algorithm correct
well let's bang on it a bit does it work
if there are two people in the room
let's see in line one we initialize n to
0 for each of these two people we then
increment n by one so on the first trip
through the loop we update n from 0 to 1
on the second trip through that same
loop we update n from 1 to 2 and so by
this algorithms end n is 2 which indeed
matches the number of people in the room
so far so good how about a corner case
though suppose that there are zero
people in the room besides me who's
doing the counting in line one we again
initialize n to 0 this time though line
3 doesn't execute at all since there
isn't a person in the room and so n
remains 0 which indeed matches the
number of people in the room pretty
simple right but
helping people one at a time is pretty
inefficient - no surely we can do better
why not count two people at a time
instead of counting one two three four
five six seven eight and so forth
why not count two four six eight and so
on it even sounds faster and it surely
is let's express this optimization in
pseudocode let n equal zero for each
pair of people in room set n equal to n
plus two
pretty simple change right rather than
count people one at a time we instead
count them two at a time this algorithms
does twice as fast as the last but is it
correct let's see does it work if there
are two people in the room in line one
we initialize n to 0 for that one pair
of people we then increment n by two and
so by this algorithms end n is two which
indeed matches the number of people in
the room suppose next that there are
zero people in the room in line one we
initialize n to 0 as before line three
doesn't execute at all since there
aren't any pairs of people in the room
and so n remain zero which indeed
matches the number of people in the room
but what if there are three people in
the room how does this algorithm fare
let's see in line one we initialize n to
0 for a pair of those people we then
increment n by two but then what there
isn't another full pair of people in the
room so blind to no longer applies and
so by this algorithms end n is still 2
which isn't correct
indeed this algorithm said to be buggy
because it has a mistake let's redress
with some new pseudocode let n equal 0
for each pair of people in room set n
equal to n plus two if one person
remains unpaired set n equal to n plus
one to solve this particular problem
we've introduced in line for a condition
otherwise known as a branch that only
executes if there's one person we could
not pair with another and so now whether
there's one or three or any odd number
of people in the room this algorithm
will now count them can we do even
better well we could count in threes or
fours or even fives and tens beyond that
it's going to get a little bit difficult
to point at the end of the day whether
executed by computers or humans
algorithms are just a set of
instructions with which to
all problems these were just three what
problem would you solve with an hour
[Music]